Tommy just joining us on Alia we have we
have been listening there to Island's
leaders the Prime Minister the foreign
minister as well uh announcing today
that Ireland will recognize formerly
recognize a Palestinian State on uh May
the
28 uh we heard from the Irish Prime
Minister first uh Simon Harris who said
Peace is possible Justice is achievable
and recognition of both a Palestinian
State and an Israeli state is
Cornerstone to which peace can be built
uh Simon uh Harris uh announcing again
that Ireland will recognize a
Palestinian State just as Norway has
done in the last hour and Spain is
expected also to do or is doing now as
uh or they have they have in fact the
prime minister is speaking right now in
Parliament in Madrid Spain also
announcing that it will recognize a
Palestinian State uh from the Irish we
we heard the Prime Minister say that
from Ireland's own history it knows what
it means to aspire to statehood and
having full rights Ireland he said uh
believed in the fundamental rights of
Palestinian people and this was also a
way for Ireland to show its unequivocal
support to the two-state solution well
the reaction from Israel to these three
countries Spain Ireland and Norway
announcing that they will recognize uh
Palestine well the reaction from Israel
has been Swift and and very angry uh the
foreign minister of Israel uh uh cat
saying that uh in his words the Irish
and Norwegian Folly does not deter us
and we are determined to achieve our
goals he says Israel will not remain
silent in the face of those who
undermine its sovereignty and endanger
its security there will be serious
consequences for the decision of Ireland
and Norway uh the Israeli foreign
minister has said and Israel has already
announced that it's withdrawing its
ambassadors from Norway and Ireland
let's bring in Mustafa bargoti once
again who's the Secretary General of the
Palestinian national initiative joining
us from romala in the occupied West Bank
Mustafa you were able to hear I believe
what uh the Irish leaders had to say
about their decision to to recognize uh
Palestine today what what is your
reaction to what you heard and also your
reaction to the angry response from
Israel well thank you first of all I
think I would be speaking on behalf of
all Palestinian people in uh welcoming
this wonderful act by Ireland and Norway
and I'm sure the Spanish step will
follow very soon they have in fact Spain
has now also recognized
Palestine excellent so three countries
hopefully Malta and Slovenia will follow
so we are talking here about a true
powerful political and symbolic
significant step uh that means a lot in
the direction of achieving freedom
justice and just peace as was said uh
but it is a very important step in
determining uh the right of the
Palestinian people our people for
self-determination and also it is a blow
up it blows away a lot of the de facto
effects that Israel has created through
settlement building on the ground uh
confirming that Palestine today is a
state under occupation and so any effect
any efforts of the occupying power to
change facts of the ground is
meaningless and will not have an impact
in the long run right but also this is
this is a blow a second one to Netanyahu
and his extreme government and to the
fascist in his Government after they
were indicted by Natan and Galant were
indicted by the international criminal
court H it means that the act of fascism
and the the the extremism in the isi
government has no future and the Israeli
reaction of the of of refusing these
recognitions and claiming that it
affects isra security is of course
something that will not convince anybody
I think this is a historical moment and
the big change Mr baruti let me ask you
this I mean you say it's a historic
moment a hugely symbolic moment but what
does it change practically on the
ground it uh it will it the main change
is of course it could be perceived as
symbolic but it's more than symbolic
because uh in fact what we have seen
since
1967 is Israel's effort to change the
status of the West band Gaza Strip and
East Jerusalem to make it Israeli they
Annex East Jerusalem they are in the
process of annexing the West Bank they
reoccupied now Gaza as well as all of
the West Bank so their goal is to Annex
the occupied territories and make it
part of Israel and consistently
ethnically cleanse Palestinians from
this land this plan is failing and the
fact that now we are a state under
occupation means that whatever Israel
did or does now in the occupied
territories will have no legal value and
eventually will have to be reversed we
we heard that is very important yeah we
we heard the three countries say that
this move they hope that this move will
complement efforts towards the two-state
solution uh and a secure lasting peace
between Israel and
Palestine but we talk about they talk
about a two-state solution is that still
something feasible today when you look
at the reality on the ground I mean what
impact is this move going to have on
this peace process and and this
two-state solution that we keep hearing
about well look now the number of states
that recognize Palestine is probably
larger than the number of countries that
recognize Israel that's very meaningful
but on the other hand of course this
will not become a reality unless Israel
withdraws and takes away all its
settlements from the occupied
territories unless Israel itself accepts
the right of the Palestinian people to
to be free from
occupation but the value of what's
happening is that the rights of the
Palestinian people cannot be cannot
vanish and whatever Israel does it will
not go away and of course the only two
solutions that are possible are either
two- State solution with where Israel
would accept an independent Sovereign
Palestinian state or one Democratic
state with equal rights for everybody
the problem is that this Israeli
government and not only the government
but also the Israeli opposition this
establishment once a third solution
which is ethnic cleansing of
Palestinians which is exactly what they
are doing now in Gaza and what they try
to do in the West Bank there is no
future for such a plan this is a I said
it's a historical moment from the
perspective of telling Israel that all
these uh fascist and extreme plans have
no future and they have to accept the
Palestinian people as equal people but
do you think this is likely to have a
positive impact on the peace
process uh sorry on what can the peace
process do you think it will have a
positive impact on
it h here you have two factors that have
to be uh changed the Israeli position of
course which is very uh extreme and the
American position which is covering up
the
Israeli without a change from the side
of the United States we will not see a
peace process but we will see the
continuation of the Palestinian struggle
which is even more Justified now with
all these recognitions I think it's now
12 countries of the European union
members that have already recognized
Palestine this means that the struggle
of the Palestinian people for their
freedom for their for justice and for
self-determination is even more
Justified than it was until that moment
happens when the United States and
Israel change and they will not change
without our struggle on the
ground thank you Mr baruti for speaking
to us Mustafa baruti uh the uh Secretary
General of the Palestine National
initiative joining us there from
ramala make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get latest news from Al jazer